CHAPTER XXI.
ELEQUENCE AND THE MASTER'S GILLED DOME.
Vacation was approaching. The schoolmaster, always severe, grew severer, and more exacting
than ever, for he wanted the school to make a good showing on Examination Day. His rod
and his ferrel were seldom idle now, at least among the smaller pupils. Only the biggest
boys and young ladies of eighteen and twenty escaped lashing. Mr. Dobbin's lashings were
very vigorous ones, too, for although he carried under his wig a perfectly bald and shiny head,
he had only reached middle age, and there was no sign of feebleness in his muscle. As
the great day approached, all the tyranny that was in him came to the surface. He seemed
to take a vindictive pleasure in punishing the least shortcomings. The consequence was
that the smaller boys spent their days in terror and suffering, and their nights in
plotting revenge. They threw away no opportunity to do the master a mischief, but he kept ahead
all the time. The retribution that followed every vengeful success was so sweeping and
that the boys all was retired from the field, badly worsted. At last they conspired together
and hit upon a plan that promised a dazzling victory. They swore in the sign-painter's
boy, told him the scheme, and asked his help. He had his own reason for being delighted,
for the master boarded in his father's family, and had given the boy ample cause to hate
him. The master's wife would go on a visit to the country in a few days, and there would
be nothing to interfere with the plan. The master always prepared himself for great occasions
by getting pretty well-fuddled, and the sign-painter's boy said that when the domine had reached
the proper condition on examination evening, he would manage the thing, while he napped
in his chair. Then he would have him awakened at the right time, and hurried away to school.
In the fullness of time the interesting occasion arrived. At eight in the evening the school-house
was brilliantly lighted, and adorned with wreaths and festoons of foliage and flowers.
The master sat throned in his great chair upon a raised platform with his blackboard
behind him. He was looking tolerably mellow. Three rows of benches on each side, and six
rows in front of him, were occupied by the dignitaries of the town, and by the parents
of the pupils. To his left, back of the rows of citizens, was a spacious temporary platform
upon which were seated the scholars, who were to take part in the exercises of the evening.
Rows of small boys, washed and dressed to an intolerable state of discomfort, rows of
gawky big boys, snow-banks of girls and young ladies clad in lawn and muslim and conspicuously
conscious of their bare arms, their grandmothers' ancient trinkets, their bits of pink and blue
ribbon, and the flowers in their hair. All the rest of the house was filled with non-participating
scholars. The exercises began. A very little boy stood up and sheepishly recited,
"'You'd scarce expect one of my age to speak in public on the stage,' etc., accompanying
himself with the painfully exact and spasmodic gestures which a machine might have used,
supposing the machine to be a trifle out of order. But he got through safely, though cruelly
scared, and got a fine round of applause when he made his manufactured bow and retired.
A little shame-faced girl lisp'd. Mary had a little lamb, etc., performed a compassion-inspired
curtsy, got her mead of applause, and sat down flushed and happy. Tom Sawyer stepped
forward with conceited confidence, and soared into the unquenchable and indestructible
"'Give me liberty or give me death!' speech, with fine fury and frantic gesticulation,
and broke down in the middle of it. A ghastly stage-fright seized him, his legs quaked under
him, and he was like to choke. True, he had the manifest sympathy of the house, but he
had the house's silence, too, which was even worse than its sympathy. The master frowned,
and this completed the disaster. Tom struggled a while, and then retired utterly defeated.
There was a weak attempt at applause, but it died early.
The boy stood on the burning deck, followed. Also, the Assyrian came down—and other declamatory
gems. Then there were reading exercises and a spelling-fight. The meagre Latin class recited
with honour—the prime feature of the evening was in order now—original compositions by
the young ladies. Each in her turn stepped forward to the edge of the platform, cleared
her throat, held up her manuscript tied with dainty ribbon, and proceeded to read with
laboured attention to expression and punctuation. The themes were the same that had been illuminated
upon similar occasions by their mothers before them, their grandmothers, and doubtless all
their ancestors in the female line clear back to the crusades. Friendship was one. Memories
of other days. Religion in history. Dreamland. The advantages of culture. Forms of political
government compared and contrasted. Melancholy. Filial love. Heart longings, etc., etc. A
prevalent feature in these compositions was a nursed and petted melancholy. Another was
a wasteful and opulent gush of fine language. Another was a tendency to lug in by the ears
particularly prized words and phrases until they were worn entirely out, and a peculiarity
that conspicuously marked and marred them was the inveterate and intolerable sermon
that wagged its crippled tail at the end of each and every one of them. No matter what
the subject might be, a brain-wracking effort was made to squirm it into some aspect or
other that the moral and religious mind could contemplate with edification. The glaring
insincerity of these sermons was not sufficient to compass the banishment of the fashion from
the schools, and it is not sufficient today. It never will be sufficient while the world
stands perhaps. There is no school in all our land where the young ladies do not feel
obliged to close their compositions with a sermon, and you will find that the sermon
of the most frivolous and the least religious girl in the school is always the longest and
the most relentlessly pious. But enough of this. Homely truth is unpalatable.
Let us return to the examination. The first composition that was read was one entitled—Is
this, then, life? Perhaps the reader can endure and extract from it. In the
common walks of life, with what delightful emotions does the youthful mind look forward to some
anticipated scene of festivity? Imagination is busy sketching rose-tinted pictures of
joy. In fancy the voluptuous rotary of fashion sees herself amid the festive throng, the
observed of all observers. Her graceful form, arrayed in snowy robes, is whirling through
the mazes of the joyous dance. Her eye is brightest. Her step is lightest in the gay
assembly. In such delicious fancies time quickly glides by, and the welcome hour arrives for
her entrance into the Elysian world, of which she has had such bright dreams. How fairy-like
does everything appear to her enchanted vision? Each new scene is more charming than the last,
but after a while she finds that beneath this goodly exterior all is vanity. The flattery
which once charmed her soul now grates harshly upon her ear. The ballroom has lost its charms,
and with wasted health and embittered heart she turns away with a conviction that earthly
pleasures cannot satisfy the longings of the soul, and so forth and so on. There was
a buzz of gratification from time to time during the reading, accompanied by whispered
ejaculations of how sweet, how eloquent, so true, etc., and after the thing had closed
with a peculiarly afflicting sermon the applause was enthusiastic. Then arose a slight melancholy
girl, whose face had the interesting paleness that comes of pills and indigestion, and read
a poem. Two stanzas of it will do.
A Missouri Maiden's Farewell to Alabama
Alabama, good-bye! I love thee well, but yet for a while do I leave thee now. Sad, yes,
sad thoughts of thee my heart to swell, and burning recollections throng my brow, for
I have wandered through thy flowery woods, have roamed and read near Talapusa's stream,
have listened to Talasea's warring floods, and wooed on Cusa's side Aurora's beam. Yet
shame I not to bear an aweful heart, nor blush to turn behind my tearful eyes, tis from no
stranger land I now must part, tis to no stranger's left I yield these sighs. Welcome and home
were mine within this state, whose veils I leave, whose spires fade fast from me, and
cold must be mine eyes, and heart and tete, when, dear Alabama, they turn cold on thee.
There were very few there who knew what tete meant, but the poem was very satisfactory
nevertheless.
Next appeared a dark-complexion, black-eyed, black-haired young lady, who paused an impressive
moment, assumed a tragic expression, and began to read in a measured, solemn tone.
A vision!
Dark and tempestuous was night. Around the throne on high not a single star quivered,
but the deep intonations of the heavy thunder constantly vibrated upon the ear, whilst the
terrific lightning reveled in angry mood through the cloudy chambers of heaven, seeming to
Even the boisterous winds unanimously came forth from their mystic homes, and blustered
about as if to enhance by their aid the wildness of the scene. At such a time so dark, so dreary,
for human sympathy, my very spirit sighed, but instead thereof,
My dearest friend, my counsellor, my comforter and guide, my joy in grief, my second bliss
in joy, came to my side.
She moved like one of those bright beings pictured in the sunny walks of fancies, Eden,
by the romantic and young, a queen of beauty unadorned save by her own transcendent loveliness.
So soft was her step, it failed to make even a sound, and but for the magical thrill imparted
by her genial touch as other unobtrusive beauties, she would have glided away unperceived, unsought.
A strange sadness rested upon her features, like icy tears upon the robe of December,
as she pointed to the contending elements without and bad me contemplate the two beings
presented.
This nightmare occupied some ten pages of manuscript, and wound up with a sermon so
destructive of all hope to non-Presbyterians that it took the first prize. This composition
was considered to be the very finest effort of the evening. The Mayor of the village,
in delivering the prize to the author of it, made a warm speech in which he said that it
was by far the most eloquent thing he had ever listened to, and that Daniel Webster
himself might well be proud of it. It may be remarked in passing that the number of
compositions in which the word BEAUTIOUS was over-fondled, and human experience referred
to as LIFE'S PAGES, was up to the usual average. Now the Master, mellow almost to the verge
of geniality, put his chair aside, turned his back to the audience, and began to draw
a map of America on the blackboard, to exercise the geography class upon. But he made a sad
business of it, with his unsteady hand, and a smothered titter rippled over the house.
He knew what the matter was, and set himself to write it. He sponged out lines and remade
them, but he only distorted them more than ever, and the tittering was more pronounced.
He threw his entire attention upon his work now, as if determined not to be put down by
the mirth. He felt that all eyes were fastened upon him. He imagined he was succeeding, and
yet the tittering continued. It even manifestly increased, and well it might. There was a
garret above, pierced with a scuttle over his head, and down through this scuttle came
suspended around the haunches by a string. She had a rag tied about her head and jaws
to keep her from ewing. As she slowly descended she curved upward and clawed at the string.
She swung downward and clawed at the intangible air. The tittering rose higher and higher.
The cat was within six inches of the absorbed teacher's head, down, down, a little lower,
and she grabbed his wig with her desperate claws, clung to it, and was snatched up into
the garret in an instant with her trophy still in her possession. And how the light did blaze
abroad from the master's bald pate, for the sign-painter's boy had gilded it! That broke
up the meeting. The boys were avenged. Vacation had come.
NOTE. The pretended compositions quoted in this chapter are taken without alteration
from a volume entitled, PROS AND POETRY BY A WESTERN LADY. But they are exactly and precisely
after the schoolgirl pattern, and hence are much happier than any mere imitations could
be.
CHAPTER XXII. Huck Finn quotes scriptures. Tom joined the new order of cadets of temperance,
being attracted by the showy character of their regalia. He promised to abstain from
smoking, chewing, and profanity, as long as he remained a member. Now he found out a new
thing—namely, that to promise not to do a thing is the surest way in the world to
make a body want to go and do that very thing. Tom soon found himself tormented with a desire
to drink and swear. The desire grew to be so intense that nothing but the hope of a
chance to display himself in his red sash kept him from withdrawing from the order.
Fourth of July was coming, but he soon gave that up—gave it up before he had worn his
shackles over forty-eight hours, and fixed his hopes upon old Judge Fraser, Justice of
the Peace, who was apparently on his death-bed and would have a big public funeral, since
he was so high and official. During three days Tom was deeply concerned about the judge's
condition and hungry for news of it. Sometimes his hopes ran so high that he would venture
to get out his regalia and practice before the looking-glass. But the judge had a most
discouraging way of fluctuating. At last he was pronounced upon the mend, and then
convalescent. Tom was disgusted, and felt a sense of injury, too. He handed in his resignation
at once, and that night the judge suffered a relapse and died. Tom resolved that he would
never trust a man like that again. The funeral was a fine thing—the cadets paraded in a
style calculated to kill the late member with envy. Tom was a free boy again, however—there
was something in that. He could drink and swear now, but found to his surprise that
he did not want to. The simple fact that he could took the desire away and the charm of
it. Tom presently wondered to find that his coveted vacation was beginning to hang a little
heavily on his hands. He attempted a diary, but nothing happened during three days, and
so he abandoned it.
The first of all the negro minstrel shows came to town, and made a sensation. Tom and
Joe Harper got up a band of performers and were happy for two days. Even the glorious
fourth was in some sense a failure, for it rained hard, there was no procession in consequence,
and the greatest man in the world, as Tom supposed, Mr. Benton, an actual United States
senator, proved an overwhelming disappointment, for he was not twenty-five feet high, nor
even anywhere in the neighborhood of it. A circus came, the boys played circus for three
days afterward in tents made of rag-carpeting—admission, three pins for boys, two for girls, and then
circusing was abandoned. A phrenologist and a mesmerizer came, and went again, and left
the village duller and drearier than ever. There were some boys' and girls' parties,
but they were so few and so delightful that they only made the aching voids between ache
the harder. Becky Thatcher was gone to her Constantinople home to stay with her parents
during vacation, so there was no bright side to life anywhere. The dreadful secret of the
murder was a chronic misery. It was a very cancer for permanency and pain. Then came
the measles. During two long weeks Tom lay a prisoner, dead to the world and its happenings.
He was very ill. He was interested in nothing. When he got upon his feet at last and moved
feebly downtown, a melancholy change had come over everything and every creature. There
had been a revival, and everybody had got religion—not only the adults, but even the
boys and girls. Tom went about hoping against hope for the sight of one blessed sinful face,
but disappointment crossed him everywhere. He found Joe Harper studying a testament,
and turned sadly away from the depressing spectacle. He sought Ben Rogers, and found
him visiting the poor with a basket of tracts. He handed up Jim Hollis, who called his attention
to the precious blessing of his late measles as a warning. Every boy he encountered added
another ton to his depression, and when, in desperation, he flew for refuge at last to
the bosom of Huckleberry Finn and was received with a scriptural quotation, his heart broke,
and he crept home and to bed, realizing that he alone of all the town was lost forever and forever.
And that night there came on a terrific storm, with driving rain, awful claps of thunder,
and blinding sheets of lightning. He covered his head with his bedclothes and waited in a horror
of suspense for his doom, for he had not the shadow of a doubt that all this hubbub was about
him. He believed he had taxed the forbearance of the powers above to the extremity of endurance,
and that this was the result. It might have seemed to him a waste of pomp and ammunition
to kill a bug with a battery of artillery, but there seemed nothing incongruous about
the getting up such an expensive thunderstorm as this to knock the turf from under an insect
like himself. By and by the tempest spent itself and died without accomplishing its object.
The boy's first impulse was to be grateful and reform. His second was to wait, for there might
be no more storms. The next day the doctors were back. Tom had relapsed. The three weeks he spent
on his back this time seemed an entire age. When he got abroad at last, he was hardly grateful
that he had been spared, remembering how lonely was his estate, how companionless and forlorn he
was. He drifted listlessly down the street and found Jim Hollis acting as judge in a juvenile
court that was trying a cat for murder, in the presence of her victim, a bird. He found Joe
Harper and Huck Finn up an alley eating a stolen melon. Poor lads! They, like Tom, had suffered a
relapse. CHAPTER XXII.
CHAPTER XXIII. The Salvation of Muff Potter.
At last the sleepy atmosphere was stirred, and vigorously, the murder trial came on in the court.
It became the absorbing topic of village talk immediately. Tom could not get away from it.
Every reference to the murder sent a shudder to his heart, for his troubled conscience and fears
almost persuaded him that these remarks were put forth in his hearing as feelers. He did not see
how he could be suspected of knowing anything about the murder, but still he could not be
comfortable in the midst of this gossip. It kept him in a cold shiver all the time.
He took Huck to a lonely place to have a talk with him. It would be some relief to unseal his
tongue for a little while, to divide his burden of distress with another sufferer. Moreover,
he wanted to assure himself that Huck had remained discreet.
Huck, have you ever told anybody about—that?
About what?
You know what?
Oh, course I haven't.
Never a word?
Never a solitary word, so help me. What makes you ask?
Well, I was afeard.
Why, Tom Sawyer, we wouldn't be alive two days if that got found out. You know that.
Tom felt more comfortable.
After a pause.
Huck, they couldn't anybody get you to tell, could they?
Get me to tell? Why, if I wanted that half-breed devil to drown me,
they could get me to tell. They ain't no different way.
Well, that's all right, then. I reckon we're safe as long as we keep Mum.
But let's swear again, anyway. It's more sure.
I'm agreed.
So they swore again, with dread solemnities.
What is the talk around, Huck? I've heard a power of it.
Talk? Well, it's just Muff Potter, Muff Potter, Muff Potter all the time.
It keeps me in a sweat, constant, so as I want to hide somewheres.
That's just the same way they go on round me. I reckon he's a goner.
Don't you feel sorry for him sometimes?
Most always, most always. He ain't no account. But
then he ain't ever done anything to hurt anybody. Just fishes a little,
to get money to get drunk on, and loess around considerable.
But, Lord, we all do that. Least ways most of us. Preachers and such like.
But he's kind of good. He give me half a fish once, when there weren't
enough for two. And lots of times he's kind of stood by me when I was
out of luck. Well, he's mended kites for me, Huck, and knitted hooks
onto my line. I wish we could get him out of there.
My, we couldn't get him out, Tom. And besides, to do any good, they'd
catch him again.
Yes, so they would. But I hate to hear him abuse him so like the
Dickens, when he never done that.
I do too, Tom. Lord, I hear him say he's the bloodiest-looking villain
in this country, and they wonder he wasn't ever hung before. Yes, they
talk like that all the time. I've heard him say that if he was to get
free they'd lynch him. And they do it too.
The boys had a long talk, but it brought them little comfort. As the
twilight drew on, they found themselves hanging about the neighborhood
of the little isolated jail, perhaps with an undefined hope that
something would happen that might clear away their difficulties. But
nothing happened. There seemed to be no angels or fairies interested in
this luckless captive.
The boys did as they had often done before. Went to the cell grating
and gave Potter some tobacco and matches. He was on the ground floor,
and there were no guards. His gratitude for their gifts had always
smote their conscience before. It cut deeper than ever this time. They
felt cowardly and treacherous to the last degree when Potter said,
You've been mighty good to me, boys. Better than anybody else in this
town. And I don't forget it. I don't. Often I says to myself, says I,
I used to mend all the boys' kites and things, and show them where the
good fishing places was, and befriend them when I could. And now
they've all forgot old Muff when he's in trouble. But Tom don't and
Huck don't. They don't forget him, says I, and I don't forget them.
Well, boys, I had done an awful thing. Drunk and crazy at the time.
That's the only way I count for it. And now I got the swing for it,
and it's right. Right and best, too, I reckon. I hope so, anyway.
Well, we won't talk about that. I don't want to make you feel bad.
You've befriended me. But what I want to say is, don't you ever get
drunk. Then you won't ever get here. Stand a little further west. So
that's it. It's a prime comfort to see faces that's friendly when a
body's in such a muck of trouble. And there don't none come here but
yorn. Good friendly faces. Good friendly faces. Get up on one other's
backs, and let me touch them. That's it. Shake hands. Yorn'll come
through the bars, but mine's too big. Little hands and weak. And they've
helped Muff Potter a power, and they'd help him more if they could.
Tom went home miserable, and his dreams that night were full of
horrors. The next day and the day after he hung about the courtroom,
drawn by an impossibly resistible impulse to go in but forcing himself
to stay out. Huck was having the same experience. They studiously
avoided each other. Each wandered away from time to time, but the same
dismal fascination always brought them back presently. Tom kept his
ears open when idlers sauntered out of the courtroom, but invariably
heard distressing news. The toils were closing more and more
relentlessly around poor Potter. At the end of the second day the
village talk was to the effect that Injun Joe's evidence stood firm and
unshaken, and that there was not the slightest question as to what the
jury's verdict would be. Tom was out late that night, and came to bed
through the window. He was in a tremendous state of excitement. It was
hours before he got to sleep. All the village flocked to the courthouse
the next morning, for this was to be the great day. Both sexes were about
equally represented in the packed audience. After a long wait the jury
filed in and took their places. Shortly afterward, Potter, pale and
haggard, timid and hopeless, was brought in with chains upon him, and
seated where all the curious eyes could stare at him. No less
conspicuous was Injun Joe, stolid as ever. There was another pause,
and then the judge arrived and the sheriff proclaimed the opening of
the court. The usual whisperings among the lawyers and gathering
together of papers followed. These details and accompanying delays
worked up an atmosphere of preparation that was as impressive as it was
fascinating. Now a witness was called who testified that he found Muff
Potter washing in the brook at an early hour of the morning that the
murder was discovered, and that he immediately sneaked away. After some
further questioning, counsel for the prosecution said,
"'Take the witness.' The prisoner raised his eyes for a moment, but
dropped them again when his own counsel said,
"'I have no questions to ask him.' The next witness proved the finding
of the knife near the corpse. Counsel for the prosecution said,
"'Take the witness.'
"'I have no questions to ask him,' Potter's lawyer replied. A third
witness swore he had often seen the knife in Potter's possession.
"'Take the witness.' Counsel for Potter declined to question him.
The faces of the audience began to betray annoyance. Did this attorney
mean to throw away his client's life without an effort? Several
witnesses deposed concerning Potter's guilty behavior when brought to
the scene of the murder. They were allowed to leave the stand without
being cross-questioned. Every detail of the damaging circumstances
that occurred in the graveyard upon that morning, which all present
remembered so well, was brought out by credible witnesses, but none of
them were cross-examined by Potter's lawyer. The perplexity and
dissatisfaction of the house expressed itself in murmurs and provoked a
reproof from the bench. Counsel for the prosecution now said,
"'By the oaths of citizens whose simple word is above suspicion, we
have fastened this awful crime, beyond all possibility of question,
upon the unhappy prisoner at the bar. We rest our case here.' A groan
escaped from poor Potter, and he put his face in his hands and rocked
his body softly to and fro, while a painful silence reigned in the
courtroom. Many men were removed, and many women's compassion testified
itself in tears. Counsel for the defense rose and said, "'Your honor,
in our remarks at the opening of this trial we foreshadowed our purpose
to prove that our client did this fearful deed while under the
influence of a blind and irresponsible delirium produced by drink. We
have changed our mind. We shall not offer that plea.' Then to the
clerk, "'Call Thomas Sawyer.' A puzzled amazement awoke in every face
in the house, not even accepting Potter's. Every eye fastened itself
with wondering interest upon Tom as he rose and took his place upon the
stand. The boy looked wild enough, for he was badly scared. The oath
was administered. Thomas Sawyer, where were you on the seventeenth of
June, about the hour of midnight?' Tom glanced at Injun Joe's iron face,
and his tongue failed him. The audience listened breathless, but the
words refused to come. After a few moments, however, the boy got a little
of his strength back, and managed to put enough of it into his voice to
make part of the house hear.
"'In the graveyard?'
"'A little bit louder, please. Don't be afraid. You were in the
graveyard.' A contemptuous smile flitted across Injun Joe's face.
"'Were you anywhere near Horse William's grave?'
"'Yes, sir.'
"'Speak up, just a trifle louder. How near were you?'
"'Near as I am to you.'
"'Were you hidden or not?'
"'I was hid.'
"'Where?'
"'Behind the elms that's on the edge of the grave.'
Injun Joe gave a barely perceptible start.
"'Anyone with you?'
"'Yes, sir. I went there with—'
"'Wait. Wait a moment. Never mind mentioning your companion's name.
We will produce him at the proper time. Did you carry anything there
with you?' Tom hesitated and looked confused.
"'Speak out, my boy. Don't be diffident. The truth is always
respectable. What did you take there?'
"'Only—uh—uh—dead cat.'
There was a ripple of mirth which the court checked.
"'We will produce the skeleton of that cat. Now, my boy, tell us
everything that occurred. Tell it in your own way. Don't skip
anything, and don't be afraid.'
Tom began hesitatingly at first, but as he warmed to his subject his
words flowed more and more easily. In a little while every sound
ceased but his own voice. Every eye fixed itself upon him. With
parted lips and bated breath the audience hung upon his words,
taking no note of time, wrapped in the ghastly fascination of the
tale. The strain upon pent emotion reached its climax when the boys
said, "'And as the doctor fetched the board around and Muff Potter
fell, Injun Joe jumped with a knife and—'
Crash! Quick as lightning the half-breed sprang for a window,
tore his way through all opposers, and was gone.'
End of chapter 23